Update Schema Objects to JSON Schema Draft 2019-09 (#1977)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: versions/3.1.0.md

#### <a name="schemaObject"></a>Schema Object

The Schema Object allows the definition of input and output data types. These types can be objects, but also primitives and arrays. This object is a superset of the [JSON Schema Draft 2019-09](http://json-schema.org/) specification.

For more information about the properties, see [JSON Schema Core](https://json-schema.org/draft/2019-09/json-schema-core.html) and [JSON Schema Validation](https://json-schema.org/draft/2019-09/json-schema-validation.html).

Unless stated otherwise, the property definitions follow the JSON Schema.

##### Properties

> The OpenAPI Schema Object is a JSON Schema vocabulary which extends JSON Schema Core and Validation vocabularies. As such any keyword available for those vocabularies is by definition available in OpenAPI, and will work the exact same way, including but not limited to:

Reviewer: What is "**a** JSON Schema vocabulary"? is it a fork of the "JSON Schema vocabulary"? if so, shouldn't we call it the "OpenAPI vocabulary" as it is referred down below? 

Where will this vocabulary be located? Can we see it? It would be nice to link it here, especially if tooling is required to support it.

Reviewer 2: A "JSON Schema vocabulary" is a specification which defines a set of keywords which have specific semantic meaning when applying a JSON Schema to a JSON instance.
A JSON Shema meta-schema defines the known vocabularies and if support for them is required in order to process the document.
You can see this in practice by looking at the General-purpose meta-schema for draft `2019-09` at http://json-schema.org/specification.html

The URI used as the vocabulary identifier, as like with $id, is not necessarily network addressable, and in the case of vocabularies, the identifier URI as a resources is reserved but not defined.

If you'd like to talk about this in more detail, feel free to come by the JSON Schema slack server, or reach out to any of the core team =]

Reviewer: I understand the mechanics. I guess where I want to get with this is: how will this translate practically-speaking when implementing this. How will one be able to support OpenAPI Schemas using the Vocabulary mechanism if none is provided (in this repo)? Will this mean it will be up to the implementor to create its own Vocabulary file?

Reviewer 3: @jstoiko I'm not sure why you think none will be provided.  This is about updating a certain part of the specification document to conform to `2019-09`.  It is not a PR to finalize every aspect of every issue related to updating JSON Schema ever.  There are various other issues and PRs filed.  PR #2016 in particular shows a first pass at a vocabulary meta-schema.

Please don't burden this PR with more work than it is already doing.  It is already doing a lot.

Reviewer 2: > How will one be able to support OpenAPI Schemas using the vocabulary mechanism if none is provided (in this repo)? - @jstoiko 

The "vocabulary" IS the specification document which defines the additional keywords.

An implementer will implement a given vocabulary. There are implementations which DO stuff with OAS 3.0 flavour JSON Schema already, right?

An implementer will not "maintain a vocabulary". They may maintain a library which supports the vocabulary. As @handrews that, and a meta-schema for any potential vocabulary, is way beyond the scope of this PR.

Author: There’s no such thing as a vocabulary file so we’re good here.

Reviewer 3: > There’s no such thing as a vocabulary file so we’re good here.

Correct.  #2016 shows one possible meta-schema for the vocabulary, with a vocabulary URI that I just made up.  The TSC may prefer to URI to either be a pure identifier, be the URI for the Schema Object specification, or be an identifier which redirects to the specification (which is more or less what we're doing with the official JSON Schema vocabulary URIs right now, although limitations of GitHub pages mean it's done in a slightly weird way using an HTLM refresh https://json-schema.org/draft/2019-09/vocab/applicator ).

The recommendation in the JSON Schema spec is that vocabulary URIs be pure identifiers, with the idea being that we can add a formal vocabulary file type later.  But that seems to confuse people too much so redirecting to the relevant specification is probably best for now.

For more information about the properties, see [JSON Schema Core](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-wright-json-schema-00) and [JSON Schema Validation](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-wright-json-schema-validation-00).
Unless stated otherwise, the property definitions follow the JSON Schema.

> ##### Properties

Reviewer 4: For the record: just notice that the paragraph above still says the Schema object is an extended subset of Draft-00.

Author: Ooooo nice catch, thank you. I'll wait for draft next then we're all set.

Author: Actually this is what the WIP links are for! Updated, please take a look.

> OpenAPI v3.1 is a JSON Schema vocabulary which extends JSON Schema Core and Validation vocabularies. As such any keyword available for those vocabularies is by definition available in OpenAPI, and will work the exact same way, including but not limited to:

Reviewer 5: I don't think it is correct to say that "OpenAPI v3.1 is a JSON Schema vocabulary".  We could say that the OpenAPI Schema object is implemented using a JSON Schema vocabulary.

Author: Great point! Absolutely

Reviewer 3: Yup.  JSON Schema vocabularies were not really meant for constructing a whole new document format with embedded JSON Schemas.

Author: Thanksa henry, it was never meant to suggest the entire thing was a vocab. Made this clear now.

- title
- type
- required
- allOf
- oneOf

> - andOf

Reviewer 4: Since this Schema object is going to be a superset of JSON Schema Draft-08, should all the `*Of` properties say the following?

"Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema."

Reviewer 4: Also, looks like a typo in "`andOf`".

Author: So... I can add:

```
- properties - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
- patternProperties - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
- additionalProperties - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
- additionalItems - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
- items - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
- propertyNames - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) and not a standard JSON Schema.
```

but should I? The point is that it _can_ be a standard JSON Schema object. Before, having a valid JSON Schema object could kill OpenAPI tooling, but now that is not true. The whole point of this thing is to make that not be the case. :)

Reviewer 3: @philsturgeon  Since this is referencing the new draft spec, you could just say that this MUST hold for all applicator keywords, and then you don't have to write it out each time 😁 

And it would apply to extension applicators as well.

Reviewer 4: But it **can** also be a Schema object right? I mean, properties like `externalDocs` **can** be there but they're not part of JSON Schema. Of course, it can be JSON Schema because it's now a subset of the Schema object but it can also be other things that are not JSON Schema but Schema objects.

Author: @fmvilas lets avoid saying Schema Object and for the sake of clarity we should prefix each time. 

In v3.0 `schema` accepts an OpenAPI Schema _only_, because giving it valid JSON Schema  would literally break it. 

In v3.1 `schema` accepts an OpenAPI Schema, which is a superset of JSON Schema, so you can give it a pure JSON Schema object, written by somebody who has never heard of OpenAPI, or you can give it a OpenAPI Schema Object (which is JSON Schema + some keywords like xml or externalDocs).

Seeing as it accepts JSON Schema objects, I don't think we should say "You cannot pass it JSON Schema objects" in the docs. Right?

Reviewer 4: Oh yeah, you're right. We should not say you can't. But we should call it for its name and it's the Schema object. Otherwise, what the spec is saying is that you can't use `xml` and `externalDocs` in these properties. Don't you think so?

So we should probably rephrase this to, e.g.:
```
- properties - Inline or referenced schema MUST be of a [Schema Object](#schemaObject) or a standard JSON Schema.
...
```

Author: I dont think this wording is disallowing xml, externalDocs, or anything else.

OpenAPI Schema Object is now a superset, which means you can use _more_ keywords in it than exist in JSON Schema, so saying this is completely redundant. 

There is no more "or JSON Schema" because OpenAPI Schema Object _is_ JSON Schema. It is just JSON Schema with a few more keywords available in it. What you're getting at would essentially be this:

> - allOf - We've already said OpenAPI Schema Objects is JSON Schema with a few more keywords in it, and here you can also use those extra keywords, just like anywhere else in `schema`, just in case you forgot
> - anyOf - We've already said OpenAPI Schema Objects is JSON Schema with a few more keywords in it, and here you can also use those extra keywords, just like anywhere else in `schema`, just in case you forgot
> - oneOf - We've already said OpenAPI Schema Objects is JSON Schema with a few more keywords in it, and here you can also use those extra keywords, just like anywhere else in `schema`, just in case you forgot
> - not - We've already said OpenAPI Schema Objects is JSON Schema with a few more keywords in it, and here you can also use those extra keywords, just like anywhere else in `schema`, just in case you forgot
> - items - We've already said OpenAPI Schema Objects is JSON Schema with a few more keywords in it, and here you can also use those extra keywords, just like anywhere else in `schema`, just in case you forgot

😅

Author: Maybe think of it in OOP.

In v3.1:

```
class OpenApi extends JsonSchema { }

function schema(JsonSchema $js) { }

schema(new OpenAPI); // yup
schema(new JsonSchema); // yup
```

You would not need to write `function schema(JsonSchema | OpenApi $js) { }` because `OpenApi` is an instance of `JsonSchema`.

Reviewer 4: I may be understanding it wrong but an OpenApi object doesn't have to be a JsonSchema instance. The opposite it's true. All properties of a JsonSchema are present in a OpenApi type but not all the OpenApi properties are present in a JsonSchema type.

Following your example above:

```
class OpenApi extends JsonSchema { }

function schema(JsonSchema $js) { }

schema({"xml": {...}}); // nope! but it must work.
```

Author: Snared by my own metaphor! The code might fail depending on the language but ignore the code, that wasn’t the point, and besides JSON Schema allows extra keywords. The main point here is that we are explicitly saying OpenAPI is a JSON Schema Vocabulary, which defines its own extra keywords. It’s not “JSON Schema inspired but different” anymore it’s literally valid meaningful JSON Schema _even with those extra keywords_. An OpenAPI Schema Object is now always and forever a valid JSON Schema instance, there’s just a sad chance that the JSON Schema implementation in question (a validation, or SDK generator, or something else) might not be aware of those extra keywords. It’s still valid JSON Schema. 

There is no need to say “and you can use all the keywords in this bit, and get here, and over here and over here and over here because you can use all the keywords anywhere inside the Schema object. We just need to say once “it’s a valid JSON Schema vocabulary” and if you’re using it on tooling which doesn’t support that OpenAPI vocabulary then most tooling would throw up a warning saying they don’t understand that vocabulary. There’s not a problem here.

Reviewer 4: Ok, I see. Thanks for the explanation. One last question: is the OpenAPI schema going to allow extra properties as JSON Schema does? I mean, without counting the extensions. For instance:

```yaml
type: string
whatever: "whatever value"
```

Would this be a valid OpenAPI schema?

Author: Great question! I'd like to say yes, but ... this is a bigger topic for elsewhere. Lets jump up to main thread and resolve this bit.

- format - See [Data Type Formats](#dataTypeFormat) for further details. While relying on JSON Schema's defined formats, the OAS offers a few additional predefined formats.
- default - The default value represents what would be assumed by the consumer of the input as the value of the schema if one is not provided. Unlike JSON Schema, the value MUST conform to the defined type for the Schema Object defined at the same level. For example, if `type` is `string`, then `default` can be `"foo"` but cannot be `1`.

Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a [Reference Object](#referenceObject) can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions instead of defining them inline.

In addition to the JSON Schema properties defined in the vocabularies defined in the JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation specifications, any properties can be used from any vocabularies, or entirely arbitrary keywords. The OpenAPI Specification defines an additional vocabulary of keywords which MAY be used along with the JSON Schema vocabulary keywords for further schema description:

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---

> <a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | Allows sending a `null` value for the defined schema. Default value is `false`.<br><br>A `nullable` value of `true` allows `null` in addition to other specified `type` values only if `nullable` and `type` are both specified within the same schema object. The effect of `"nullable" : true` is limited to its expansion of the set of allowed types, within the scope of its containing schema. An `enum`, `const`, `allOf`, or other keyword can independently prohibit `null` values, effectively overriding `"nullable" : true`.<br><br>A `nullable` value of `false` leaves the specified or default `type` unmodified. It has no effect on the schema object.<br><br>**Deprecated:** The `type` property now allows "null" as a type, alone or within a type array. This is the standard way to allow null values in JSON Schema. Use of `nullable` is discouraged, and later versions of this specification may remove it.

Reviewer 3: This suggestion aligns the `nullable` language with the OAS 3.0.3 language from PR #2046, with minimal wording tweaks to account for `type` now being able to have multiple values (type arrays).

```suggestion
<a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | A true value adds `"null"` to the allowed type(s) specified by the `type` keyword, only if `type` is explicitly defined within the same Schema Object.  Other Schema Object constraints retain their defined behavior, and therefore may disallow the use of `null` as a value.  A `false` value leaves the specified or default value(s) of `type` unmodified.  The default value is `false`.
<br><br>**Deprecated:** The `type` property now allows `"null"` as a type, alone or within a type array. This is the standard way to allow `null` values in JSON Schema. Use of `nullable` is discouraged, and later versions of this specification may remove it.
```

Reviewer 6: Looks good. Thanks!

Author: I forgot to apply this suggestion, so its over here https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/2124

- exclusiveMaximum - Value can be a numeric value just like JSON Schema, or for backwards compatibility with older drafts it can accept a boolean to act as a modifier to the `minimum` keyword. The numeric value usage is recommended.
- description - [CommonMark syntax](http://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation.
- format - See [Data Type Formats](#dataTypeFormat) for further details. While relying on JSON Schema's defined formats, the OAS offers a few additional predefined formats.
- default - The default value represents what would be assumed by the consumer of the input as the value of the schema if one is not provided. Unlike JSON Schema, the value MUST conform to the defined type for the Schema Object defined at the same level. For example, if `type` is `string`, then `default` can be `"foo"` but cannot be `1`.

Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a [Reference Object](#referenceObject) can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions instead of defining them inline.

> In addition to the JSON Schema properties, the following OpenAPI vocabulary properties MAY be used for further schema documentation:

Author: As an alternative to https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/1977/files#diff-b83206d953b4be5d312b068f82ba0217R2338 we could add a note here about vocab keywords and arbitrary keywords, like...

>  In addition to the JSON Schema properties defined in the Core and Validation vocabularies, any properties can be used from any vocabularies, or entirely arbitrary keywords. OpenAPI has its own vocabulary properties which MAY be used for further schema documentation:

Reviewer 2: I think the content of this comment would be preferable. I think it makes it clearer that "vocabularies" is a JSON Schema concept, and therefore that's where one should go to understand it if you care about such things.

Author: Done!

<a name="schemaExternalDocs"></a>externalDocs | [External Documentation Object](#externalDocumentationObject) | Additional external documentation for this schema.
<a name="schemaExample"></a>example | Any | A free-form property to include an example of an instance for this schema. To represent examples that cannot be naturally represented in JSON or YAML, a string value can be used to contain the example with escaping where necessary.<br><br>**Deprecated:** The `example` property has been deprecated in favor of the JSON Schema `examples` keyword. Use of `example` is discouraged, and later versions of this specification may remove it.

This object MAY be extended with [Specification Extensions](#specificationExtensions).

###### <a name="schemaComposition"></a>Composition and Inheritance (Polymorphism)

The OpenAPI Specification allows combining and extending model definitions using the `allOf` property of JSON Schema, in effect offering model composition.
`allOf` takes an array of object definitions that are validated *independently* but together compose a single object.

> 

Reviewer 7: If we are going to mention `allOf` as a means to express polymorphism, why not also mention `oneOf` and `anyOf`.  This would be a great place to expand on the similarities and differences of these constructs.

Author: Good question Mike, but this PR doesn't change allOf, oneOf, or anyOf, so I think I'd rather not touch this now? I can put the whitespace removal back so it doesnt show up on the diff?

Reviewer 7: No changes needed.  You're right that it was the whitespace change that brought this to my attention, but I agree that it is outside the scope of the JSON Schema changes.  It's a minor point really, but I may open an issue to fix this up so that it doesn't get lost.

- description - [CommonMark syntax](http://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation.
- format - See [Data Type Formats](#dataTypeFormat) for further details. While relying on JSON Schema's defined formats, the OAS offers a few additional predefined formats.
- default - The default value represents what would be assumed by the consumer of the input as the value of the schema if one is not provided. Unlike JSON Schema, the value MUST conform to the defined type for the Schema Object defined at the same level. For example, if `type` is `string`, then `default` can be `"foo"` but cannot be `1`.

Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a [Reference Object](#referenceObject) can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions instead of defining them inline.

In addition to the JSON Schema fields, the following OpenAPI vocabulary properties MAY be used for further schema documentation:

##### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---

> <a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | Allows or disallows sending a `null` value for the defined schema. A `nullable` value of `false` disallows `null` unconditionally, equivalent to `"not" : {"type" : "null"}` . A `nullable` value of `true` allows `null` in addition to other specified `type` values only if `nullable` and `type` are both specified within the same schema context. The effect of `"nullable" : true` is limited to its expansion of the set of allowed types, within the scope of its containing schema. An `enum`, `const`, `allOf`, or other keyword can independently prohibit `null` values, effectively overriding `"nullable" : true`.<br><br>**Deprecated:** The `type` property now allows "null" as a type, alone or within a type array. This is the standard way to allow null values in JSON Schema. Use of `nullable` is discouraged, and later versions of this specification may remove it.

Reviewer 3: I think in place of "schema context" what we want is "schema object".  That is the term that JSON Schema uses throughout the newer specifications.  e.g. `{"type": "integer", "nullable": true}` has `"type"` and `"nullable"` in the same schema object, while `{"allOf": [{"type": "integer"}, {"nullable": true}]}` does not.

Reviewer 6: > I think in place of "schema context" what we want is "schema object". 

Yes, agreed. I was trying to emphasize that the expansion of allowed types does not transcend the schema boundary. "Schema object" works just fine for this.

- uniqueItems
- maxProperties
- minProperties
- enum
- propertyNames
- contains
- const
- examples

> - if / then / else

Reviewer 8: Worried that for instance these keys will make creating tooling which supports 3.1 much difficult than supporting 3.0

Author: @jcarres-mdsol could you quantify that in any way? What sort of tooling are you concerned about, and how do you think it is likely to make tooling more complicated? Is it simply "more is worse" or are there specific concerns about if / then / else in particular? 

Did you see my link to the notes about how `if: X, then: Y, else: Z` is equivalent to `oneOf: [allOf: [X, Y], allOf: [not: X, Z]]`?

Reviewer 3: @jcarres-mdsol the other important thing about moving to draft-08 is that it supports extensible vocabularies, and one of the primary use cases for that is to improve OpenAPI tooling support.

For example, it is currently very awkward to use JSON Schema as a data definition language- it is simply not designed for that.  The current JSON Schema vocabulary is a constraint system, not a definition system.

However, draft-08 will allow defining keywords that (for example) can disambiguate how to interpret an `allOf` (is this an inheritance structure where on branch is the base class and therefore code gen tools should generate and connect two classes? or is it just gluing some re-usable fields together and the code-gen tool should ignore the pieces and generate one class from the result of the `allOf`?)

Ultimately, draft-08 should make tooling **dramatically easier** to create.  That's the whole point of it.  But those parts don't show up in this PR yet for a variety of reasons.

Reviewer 3: From a validation perspective, `if`/`then`/`else` says how to figure out which set of rules to use, and how to apply them.

From a data definition perspective, an `if`/`then`/`else` probably means something like "there are two subclasses here."

We need to stop trying to contort generative tooling (code gen, ui gen, doc gen) to fit a constraint system and instead add keywords that support generative use cases.  Using the JSON Schema validation vocabulary to generate things is like trying to hammer a nail with a screwdriver.  You can probably make it happen if the screwdriver has a nice heavy handle, but it's kind of ridiculous to do.

Up until now, OpenAPI has only had the options of doing that hammering, or breaking compatibility with JSON Schema.  And they've tried to strike a balance between those two distasteful options.  Draft-08 is designed to move past that problem and provide a real solution.

Reviewer 8: I was thinking of a couple of use-cases. 
One is generation for statically typed languages but as per your explanation of the meaning of `if-then-else`, if generator already have support for `oneOf` we have already crossed that bridge so I would rectify my comment, it should not be much extra work.

in-house we have a linter which applies some rules, we have had multiple fixes over `oneOf` , `allOf`. I do agree, bringing this vocabulary more in line with draft-8 would be at least be less confusing for people implementing the tools. 

So, I'd like to change my comment to a +1 on this!

- dependentRequired / dependentSchemas
- deprecated
- additionalItems
- additionalProperties
- unevaluatedItems
- unevaluatedProperties
- maxContains
- minContains
- readOnly
- writeOnly

The following properties are taken from the JSON Schema definition but their definitions were adjusted to the OpenAPI Specification.

- exclusiveMinimum - Value can be a numeric value just like JSON Schema, or for backwards compatibility with older drafts it can accept a boolean to act as a modifier to the `minimum` keyword. The numeric value usage is recommended.
- exclusiveMaximum - Value can be a numeric value just like JSON Schema, or for backwards compatibility with older drafts it can accept a boolean to act as a modifier to the `minimum` keyword. The numeric value usage is recommended.
- description - [CommonMark syntax](http://spec.commonmark.org/) MAY be used for rich text representation.
- format - See [Data Type Formats](#dataTypeFormat) for further details. While relying on JSON Schema's defined formats, the OAS offers a few additional predefined formats.

> - default - The value MUST conform to the defined type for the Schema Object defined at the same level. For example, if `type` is `string`, then `default` can be `"foo"` but cannot be `1`. This differs from JSON Schema which only RECOMMENDS the default conforms to the schema.

Reviewer 5: From what I have experienced, this is going to break a lot of OAS documents. I'm not saying it is not the right thing to do but we need to plan for it.  I don't see how this can be a 3.1 change.

Author: There’s nothing changing here is there? It’s explaining a difference to JSON Schema.

Reviewer 3: @philsturgeon why did you change this at all?  The old wording seems fine, and in particular the "what would be assumed by...." wording correctly captures the way `default` is described.  In particular, it does **not** mean "write this value into the instance if it is missing," which is why that wording is there.

Author: I'll revert this. The original seemed confusing so I had a swing at making it more readable, but its possible I just didn't detect the meaning.

Reviewer 5: To add to the confusion, I mixed this up with the requirement that example has to conform with the JSON Schema.  My original comment is invalid!   If I remember correctly, the "what would be assumed" phrase was to discourage tooling from injecting the "default" value and therefore API implementations losing the visibility into whether the consumer provided the value or not.

Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a [Reference Object](#referenceObject) can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions instead of defining them inline.

In addition to the JSON Schema fields, the following OpenAPI vocabulary fields MAY be used for further schema documentation:

##### Fixed Fields
Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---

> <a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | Allows sending a `null` value for the defined schema. Default value is `false`. Deprecated. Move towards using `"type": "null"` & type arrays , e.g: `"type": ["string", "null"]`.

Reviewer 5: Surely `"type": "null"` is not a useful construct.  Wouldn't we just recommend type arrays? This also means we should provide an annotation so that code generators would know which type to default for languages that don't support union types.

Author: This is talking about how “null” is added to the list of available types, and adding type arrays. If anyone would ever use type: null or not is fairy irrelevant and restricting it would probably be arbitrary.

Reviewer 9: > Surely "type": "null" is not a useful construct. Wouldn't we just recommend type arrays?

Agree here, IMHO it makes sense to recommend usage of type arrays, even if a given definition starts off with only a single type in the array.

> This also means we should provide an annotation so that code generators would know which type

One option is to recommend leveraging the first type in the array in such cases - would that be too transparent? This is similar to what unofficially goes on in many tools around the `tags` array - the first tag is often used as the primary grouping mechanism, or the generated class name, etc.

Reviewer 3: @darrelmiller @philsturgeon I think maybe re-wording this to emphasize `"null"` as a valid type that can be used in the array form to replace `nullable`, rather than writing out `"type": "null"`, would be less confusing.  (FWIW, I've seen `"type": "null"`used in some sort of weird compatibility mode where a field couldn't be entirely removed but no longer had any possible useful value- definitely a pathological case, but it can happen).

Author: Got it, great idea.

Author: @handrews @marbemac @darrelmiller I improved this confusing type: null working, please see if this is better or if I made things worse. I'm gonna click resolve so please comment on the new stuff.

<a name="schemaDiscriminator"></a>discriminator | [Discriminator Object](#discriminatorObject) | Adds support for polymorphism. The discriminator is an object name that is used to differentiate between other schemas which may satisfy the payload description. See [Composition and Inheritance](#schemaComposition) for more details.
<a name="schemaXml"></a>xml | [XML Object](#xmlObject) | This MAY be used only on properties schemas. It has no effect on root schemas. Adds additional metadata to describe the XML representation of this property.
<a name="schemaExternalDocs"></a>externalDocs | [External Documentation Object](#externalDocumentationObject) | Additional external documentation for this schema.
<a name="schemaExample"></a>example | Any | A free-form property to include an example of an instance for this schema. To represent examples that cannot be naturally represented in JSON or YAML, a string value can be used to contain the example with escaping where necessary.

> 

Reviewer 5: What are the consequences of removing this?  Will this break anyone?

Author: This is removed as an “extra keyword” because it exists in JSON Schema and is in the list of “JSON Schema keywords that are supported”.

Seeing as it works the same, everything is fine :)

Reviewer 3: @darrelmiller translation: We shamelessly lifted this keyword (and also `writeOnly`) from OAS 😛

Alternatively, any time a Schema Object can be used, a [Reference Object](#referenceObject) can be used in its place. This allows referencing definitions instead of defining them inline.

> In addition to the JSON Schema properties defined in the JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation vocabularies, any properties can be used from any vocabularies, or entirely arbitrary keywords. OpenAPI has its own vocabulary properties which MAY be used for further schema description:

Reviewer 3: @philsturgeon 

> JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation vocabularies

This should probably be one of the following (changes italicized):

* JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation _specifications_
* _vocabularies defined in the_ JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation _specifications_
* _Core, Applicator, Validation, Meta-Data, Format, and Content vocabularies from the_  JSON Schema Core and JSON Schema Validation _specifications_

The Core and Validation specs each define multiple vocabularies, one of which matches the spec name 😕

In place of

> OpenAPI has its own vocabulary properties

maybe

* The OpenAPI Specification defines an additional vocabulary of keywords which MAY be used along with the JSON Schema vocabulary keywords

not sure that's great, but I want to try to align the usage of the "vocabulary" concept.  It will fit better with how this will show up in the OAS 3.1 schema itself.

Reviewer 2: That's a good point. My preference would be to go with the second suggestion. It makes the precidence clear without information overload.

Most people probably won't be interested to know about the specific vocabularies from the JSON Schema spec, although you could argue that those reading this section are likely to be such.

Author: Sorted, thanks!

##### Fixed Fields
Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---:|---

> <a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | Allows sending a `null` value for the defined schema. Default value is `false`. Deprecated. Type arrays are now preferred, using the new `"null"` type, e.g: `"type": ["string", "null"]`. Nullable cannot be used in conjunction with a type array and implementations MUST ignore it.

Reviewer 3: How about:

> <a name="schemaNullable"></a>nullable | `boolean` | Allows sending a `null` value for the defined schema when used alongside the `type` keyword with a single value. Default value is false.  Deprecated. Type arrays are now preferred, using the `"null"` type alongside one or more other types, e.g: `"type": ["string", "null"]`. `nullable` cannot be used in conjunction with a type array, or when `type` is absent, and implementations MUST ignore it in such cases.  In particular, the default value of `nullable` MUST be ignored when `type` is absent or when `type` has an array value such as `["string", "null"]`.

This will ensure that the empty schema, `{}`, correctly allows the JSON `null` literal as a valid value.  To do otherwise violates a fundamental design principle of JSON Schema, and there is no way we can claim compatibility.  The empty schema MUST NOT ever produce an invalid result.
